Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is an advanced technique in natural 
language processing that combines retrieval-based methods with generative models to enhance 
the quality and relevance of generated text. The core idea behind RAG is to leverage a large 
corpus of documents or knowledge base to retrieve relevant information that can inform and guide the generation process.

📚 RAG Document Q&A — Chat with Your PDFs
A complete Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) application: upload any PDF, ask questions in plain English, and get answers grounded in the document — with page-level citations and similarity scores for every source.

Built with LangChain · ChromaDB · SentenceTransformers · Groq · Streamlit.

RAG Architecture

✨ Features
📄 PDF ingestion — upload one or more PDFs; text is extracted page by page with PyMuPDF
✂️ Smart chunking — recursive character splitting with tunable chunk size and overlap, so context isn't lost at chunk boundaries
🧠 Semantic search — chunks are embedded with all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (384-dim vectors) and stored in a persistent ChromaDB collection using cosine similarity
⚡ Fast, grounded answers — Groq's Llama 3.3 70B answers using only the retrieved context, dramatically reducing hallucinations
🔍 Transparent citations — every answer shows the exact source chunks, page numbers, and similarity scores. No black box.
🎛️ Tunable retrieval — adjust top-k, chunk size, and overlap live from the sidebar and see how retrieval quality changes
🏗️ How It Works
PDF upload → PyMuPDF text extraction → recursive chunking
→ SentenceTransformer embeddings → ChromaDB vector store
→ cosine similarity search → Groq LLM answer with cited sources
Data ingestion pipeline:

Data Ingestion Pipeline

Full RAG pipeline:

Building the RAG Pipeline

🚀 Quickstart
1. Clone and install (using uv — recommended):

git clone https://github.com/NiazUMahmud/RAG-Portfolio-Projects.git
cd RAG-Portfolio-Projects
uv sync
Or with plain pip:

python -m venv .venv
.\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
pip install -r requirements.txt
2. Add your Groq API key (free at console.groq.com) — create a .env file in the project root:

GROQ_API_KEY=your_key_here
3. Run the app:

uv run streamlit run app.py
4. Use it — upload a PDF in the sidebar, click Ingest uploaded PDFs, then ask questions in the chat.

Try it with the included Attention Is All You Need paper — ask "What is multi-head attention?" and watch it answer with the formula, citing page 5. 🎯

🧰 Tech Stack
Component	Technology
UI	Streamlit (chat interface, live settings)
PDF parsing	PyMuPDF
Chunking	LangChain RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter
Embeddings	SentenceTransformers (all-MiniLM-L6-v2)
Vector store	ChromaDB (persistent, cosine similarity)
LLM	Groq — Llama 3.3 70B / Llama 3.1 8B
Environment	Python 3.13 · uv
📁 Project Structure
├── app.py                      # Streamlit RAG app (the main deliverable)
├── data/notebook/
│   ├── document.ipynb          # Notebook: ingestion → embeddings → vector store
│   └── data/pdf/               # Sample PDFs for testing
├── pdf_loader.ipynb            # Notebook: retriever pipeline experiments
├── typesense.ipynb             # Notebook: Typesense as an alternative vector store
├── pyproject.toml              # Dependencies (uv)
└── requirements.txt            # Dependencies (pip)
The notebooks document the learning journey — building each pipeline stage by hand (document loaders, embedding manager, vector store wrapper, retriever) before assembling them into the polished app.

💡 Key Lessons Learned
Chunking strategy matters more than you'd think — chunk size and overlap directly change retrieval quality
Cosine vs. L2 distance is not a detail you can ignore — ChromaDB defaults to L2; converting distance to a similarity score only makes sense once the collection is configured for cosine (hnsw:space: cosine)
Grounding the LLM with "answer only from the provided context" plus explicit source citations makes answers verifiable and cuts hallucinations
🔐 Security
API keys are loaded from .env (git-ignored) — never committed to source control. Generated vector stores are also git-ignored and rebuilt by re-ingesting PDFs.